content/posts/how-orgs-impact-testing-career.md, before:

---
title: "How your leader can impact your career"
date: 2019-08-04T13:05:43-05:00
draft: true
---

Question:

Does reporting to a QA/test manager vs. a non-QA/test manager affect your career growth? @ckenst says, our career growth is in our own hands, though a manager can help with support for it. #StateOfTesting panel

I think it depends on 1) the company/organizational view of testers 2) what part of your skillset you're trying to emphasize. In my case, reporting to a QE director as part of a separate QE org absolutely hurt my career growth at a certain point

In my case, I worked with dev organizations that mostly had negative views on the technical skills of testers, and my goal was to stress my test automation expertise. There was little push from dev leaders to change these views since we were separate organizations

I think regardless of your skill to influence, without a large number of advocates it can be almost impossible to overcome the bias of an organization, regardless of proven ability to deliver or knowledge of your field.

# What you can and can't control in your career growth as a tester (or for anyone)

Managing your career and knowing what the "right" next step to take is (and when
to take it) is extremely challenging. We move to positions that we think are
interesting and have challenging work. We stay with leaders who encourage growth
and believe in our potential. In an ideal situation, it can be tempting to
believe that nothing can stop your growth given the situation you've found
yourself in. However, and unfortunately, there's many facets/aspects that impact
your ability to grow. Some are completely in your control, some are in your
ability to influence, and others are things that you personally have no control
over. In my last role (which lasted almost 9 years) I struggled to not only
figure out what I needed to do to grow and advance, but also understand which
of those aspects I could control. Trying to control aspects of potential career
growth that you can't control will cause fustration, depression, and be harmful
to your growth. All of that said, I wanted to share some of my insights about
career growth that I've encountered. My hope is that someone else in similar
situations might read this and have revelations that help them either take
the next step they need or avoid a pitfall that I slipped into.

# What you can control

## Desire to learn and tenacity

Especially early in your career, one of the most impactful traits that I've
noticed in myself and others I've worked with is that their growth and
advancement lined up with a) how willing they were to learn new things and b)
the will to stick with learning new things even if the topic was challenging,
wasn't sticking for them yet, or they were just needed to stumble in the dark
because there was no one to show them the way. These are traits that are
difficult to teach, but so critical to how far you advance.

## Where you work

To some degree, we all have a choice about where we work. We vote with our
feet (physical or virtual) every day we show up for work. Our employer

# There will always be things you can't control in your career

Does reporting to a QA/test manager vs. a non-QA/test manager affect your career
growth? @ckenst says, our career growth is in our own hands, though a manager
can help with support for it. #StateOfTesting panel

I ran into this post on Twitter a few weeks back, which stirred up very mixed
emotions about the past 12 years as a software tester and developer. In that
time I've spent time to reporting to dev managers and quality managers, and
I wanted to share my experiences in the hope that it gives someone else the
perspective they might need to make the choices they need to make to reach
their career goals.

## A bit about my situation

Before diving in, let me provide some context on how my career started and how
I thought things would work out. Like many people in the test field, I ended up
there unintentionally. I started working for a consulting group in 2006, one
year before I graduated from university. I had taken programming classes in
high school as well as in university, but I didn't have the knowledge or
confidence to jump into application development. As was common knowledge back
then, the proper place for someone in my situation was QA. After a year of
stumbling around on my own learning Ruby and Watir, I started to flourish and
was cranking out test plans and automated tests as if I was always meant to be
doing it. My company had been struggling with finding strong testers, so to my
annoyance at the time, I became "the test guy". While I did end up doing some
web application development during my five years there, my passion for figuring
out how to do testing "right" pushed me to take a QA role at a much larger
company to see how far I could take this testing path. I started out reporting
to a QA manager that reported up into the product development team. The product
portfolio of the organization was growing extremely rapidly and our team was
struggling to keep up, so they hired a VP of Quality Engineering to build a new,
seperate organization that could be a center of excellence for testing. I had
the opportunity as still very much a journeyman tester to learn how to
strategize testing for not just one team, but dozens of teams. Instead of having
just a few team mates who were either testers or developers who had some
interest in test to bounce ideas of off, I had dozens of people with a wide
range of testing background to get feedback and idea from. It was an extremely
supportive environment (for the most part). We did bicker about what the "right"
way to do test automation was, the value of test plans and what needed to be in
them, and how code/developer-centric our automated tests should be, but I think
that was a necessary part of the growth process, at least for the first 4 or 5
years. However, after a time, the bike-shedding started to take its toll.
Afterall, if we had created much of our processes and test automation design
libraries and patterns from thin air, why couldn't newer team members do the
same? Over time, the efficiencies that we had tried to build slowed as internal
discussions began to overtake work completed. Our internal soul searching was
also less meaningful to the development organizations we supported, who simply
wanted their applications tested and "signoff" done. Because we were our own
silo, they could not directly impact our processes, just like we could not
directly influence theirs. While there certainly were some teams where
development and test co-existed in a peaceful and symbotic manner, more teams
questioned why our QE organization wasn't a part of the development organization
and why individual testers didn't report directly into their teams instead of
through a dotted line. More challenging than that was development leaders and
devs who questioned the technical ability and knowledge of the QE organization.
In some cases this came out as a philisophical question. In others, mine
specifically, it often came out at passive agressive comments in meetings or
emails. Beyond the technical challenges of automation, the domain the teams
I worked with was additionally complex, which required finding testers who
were willing to wrap their heads around those challenging topics. While we did
have sprints, the dev and test teams still very much operated in silos and in
a "scummerfall" manner. There were two test environments, of which one was
allotted to our teams to use. We did have automated deployments, but we did
not have automated validation of those deployments. Instead, our functional
tests were the first to pick up on failed deployments to servers,
network issues, and a plethora of other common problems. Given that our testing
was of the APIs, these issues appeared to be bugs, which led to a larger than
normal set of bugs that were created but closed as "environmental". This also
meant that we were responsible for having some team members online for each
production release to run our functional tests and triage failures before the
maintenance could be marked as complete. Patience for test failures at 2 am when
everyone really wanted to get to bed was very short. Stumbling into these
"environmental" issues and other transient issues which required the re-running
of long test suites built a sense of distrust between the dev/ops teams and QE.
It was often pointed out that our tests seemed flaky, even though the failures
were legitimate issues, though not related to the actual application code.
Distrust on both sides grew into hostility, turning an already challenging work
environment into one that required endless due dilligence, documentation, and
reports necessary to prove points that were being ignored or to use as evidence
of our work incase we were thrown under the bus. Unfortunately, at that point
there was no amount of talking, test improvements, or reporting to repair the
dev/test relationship. My leaders and the development leaders both reported up
different silos, so there was no easy way to de-escalate the tensions and
concerns. Through all this, I believed that I could still "fix" things. Better
automated tests. More reporting. More visibility into how things were being
tested and what really happened when tests failed. I thought that somehow, all
alone, I could make things right again. As I'm sure you can guess, I couldn't.
When I returned from leave after getting married, my boss told me that it was
time to let go, and that he would be re-assigning me to another team. My
mental response was a mixture of relief, anger, and shame. I didn't have to deal
with trying to move this un-moveable problem anymore, but I had failed in my
mission to make things right. I "lost", they "won". My confidence was broken at
that point, and despite the encouragement of my leaders, it took at least 2
years for me to mostly recover. I still question myself far more than I did
before, which is a habit that I'm working on breaking. The painful lesson I
learned from this story is that there are some workspace problems that either
can't or won't be fixed. I could not explain, influence, or engineer my way of
the perceptions and biases that my development team had. I would like to think
that most reasonable people would have quit before hitting the red line like I
did. Knowing when you're facing a challenge that is negatively impacting your
career and is something that is likely not to be resolved is a lesson that I
wish I could have learned in a less painful way, but now it's certainly a lesson
I won't forget.

## Benefits of reporting to a test leader

Their focus is solely on testing. They may have a greater pool of knowledge
about testing strategies, test automation, and metrics that are useful to
produce.

You probably have a lot of other testers as a team mates. This not only gives
you a larger pool of people to ask questions to, but creates a "safe" zone to
talk about testing topics and build a culture where testing and newer testing
techniques are embraced.

Your leader may understand your accomplishments and challenges you've overcome
more clearly and may be able to be a stronger advocate for you. Again, it
partially depends on organizational biases about testing. If testers are
embraced as "full-share"/equal team members in discussions, then this point is
less important. However, if testers are looked down on as "less than", your
leader might be your primary source of positive information about your
contributions to senior leadership. However, this also relies on your leader's
ability to influence and explain the impact of your work as well. There is a
large difference between a leader stating "Well X is the greatest tester I've
worked with!" and "Here's some metrics I pulled since X join the team, and we've
and Y percent less bugs discovered in production since he joined the team". One
is a feeling, the other is documented improvement.

## Downsides of reporting to a test leader

You have a different leader than other members of your team. Issues between two
ICs on the project now require including their managers. If the issue can't be
resolved, it may require meetings to sort things out and come to an agreement.
However, if the whole team reports to a single leader, when necessary the leader
can make a decision one way or another and keep the team productive.

Your leader's vision of testing may not align with your own. Maybe you're an
exploritory tester wanting to find all the corner cases, but your leader is
all about test automation. You may have hoped that having a leader with a
simular background would accelerate the growth path you wanted, but their
priorities may not align with yours. Given that your leader is the decision
maker for your thought area, unless you can convince them to allow you to grow
in the way you intended, you have no one else to appeal to without having an
outside leader come in and advocate on your behalf, which could be seen as
breaking the chain of command and not taken well.

## Upsides of reporting to a dev manager

If your growth path is to eventually be a developer, you can work directly with
your manager to make that happen. They also have direct visibility into your
work, so proving your abilities should be less challenging.

If your area of interest in testing is test automation, you likely have a huge
advocate on your side. Creating test automation is a development activity, and
showing that you can align with the team's development style and requirements
even as a tester shows that you take test automation seriously.

If you report to the same dev manager as everyone on the team, then the team is
aligned on the same goal. This generally means less infighting about priorities,
more visibility into testing activities, and more team acknowledgement of your
wins in your role. Having your team act as your advocates as well as your
manager makes your accomplishes that much more visible.

## Downsides of reporting to a dev manager

If your leader has a poor view of testing, they may do little to advocate for
you. If devs are seen as a higher rank than testers, your leader may see your
only opportunity for advancement as switching to a developer at some point.

If you're very good at what you do and want some mobility either in test or dev,
your leader may encourage you to stay in your current role because of your
value. This often isn't malicious, but a statement of the value they see you
bringing to the team. It can be uncomfortable to work against those statements
of value towards what you see as your real career goals. Everyone wants to be
consider valuable, and to give that up to be something else can be a difficult
mental hurdle.

Commit message:

Added 'what you want from a leader' section

content/posts/how-orgs-impact-testing-career.md, after:

---
title: "How your leader can impact your career"
date: 2019-08-04T13:05:43-05:00
draft: true
---

Question:

Does reporting to a QA/test manager vs. a non-QA/test manager affect your career growth? @ckenst says, our career growth is in our own hands, though a manager can help with support for it. #StateOfTesting panel

I think it depends on 1) the company/organizational view of testers 2) what part of your skillset you're trying to emphasize. In my case, reporting to a QE director as part of a separate QE org absolutely hurt my career growth at a certain point

In my case, I worked with dev organizations that mostly had negative views on the technical skills of testers, and my goal was to stress my test automation expertise. There was little push from dev leaders to change these views since we were separate organizations

I think regardless of your skill to influence, without a large number of advocates it can be almost impossible to overcome the bias of an organization, regardless of proven ability to deliver or knowledge of your field.

# What you can and can't control in your career growth as a tester (or for anyone)

Managing your career and knowing what the "right" next step to take is (and when
to take it) is extremely challenging. We move to positions that we think are
interesting and have challenging work. We stay with leaders who encourage growth
and believe in our potential. In an ideal situation, it can be tempting to
believe that nothing can stop your growth given the situation you've found
yourself in. However, and unfortunately, there's many facets/aspects that impact
your ability to grow. Some are completely in your control, some are in your
ability to influence, and others are things that you personally have no control
over. In my last role (which lasted almost 9 years) I struggled to not only
figure out what I needed to do to grow and advance, but also understand which
of those aspects I could control. Trying to control aspects of potential career
growth that you can't control will cause fustration, depression, and be harmful
to your growth. All of that said, I wanted to share some of my insights about
career growth that I've encountered. My hope is that someone else in similar
situations might read this and have revelations that help them either take
the next step they need or avoid a pitfall that I slipped into.

# What you can control

## Desire to learn and tenacity

Especially early in your career, one of the most impactful traits that I've
noticed in myself and others I've worked with is that their growth and
advancement lined up with a) how willing they were to learn new things and b)
the will to stick with learning new things even if the topic was challenging,
wasn't sticking for them yet, or they were just needed to stumble in the dark
because there was no one to show them the way. These are traits that are
difficult to teach, but so critical to how far you advance.

## Where you work

To some degree, we all have a choice about where we work. We vote with our
feet (physical or virtual) every day we show up for work. Our employer

# There will always be things you can't control in your career

Does reporting to a QA/test manager vs. a non-QA/test manager affect your career
growth? @ckenst says, our career growth is in our own hands, though a manager
can help with support for it. #StateOfTesting panel

I ran into this post on Twitter a few weeks back, which stirred up very mixed
emotions about the past 12 years as a software tester and developer. In that
time I've spent time to reporting to dev managers and quality managers, and
I wanted to share my experiences in the hope that it gives someone else the
perspective they might need to make the choices they need to make to reach
their career goals.

## A bit about my situation

Before diving in, let me provide some context on how my career started and how
I thought things would work out. Like many people in the test field, I ended up
there unintentionally. I started working for a consulting group in 2006, one
year before I graduated from university. I had taken programming classes in
high school as well as in university, but I didn't have the knowledge or
confidence to jump into application development. As was common knowledge back
then, the proper place for someone in my situation was QA. After a year of
stumbling around on my own learning Ruby and Watir, I started to flourish and
was cranking out test plans and automated tests as if I was always meant to be
doing it. My company had been struggling with finding strong testers, so to my
annoyance at the time, I became "the test guy". While I did end up doing some
web application development during my five years there, my passion for figuring
out how to do testing "right" pushed me to take a QA role at a much larger
company to see how far I could take this testing path. I started out reporting
to a QA manager that reported up into the product development team. The product
portfolio of the organization was growing extremely rapidly and our team was
struggling to keep up, so they hired a VP of Quality Engineering to build a new,
seperate organization that could be a center of excellence for testing. I had
the opportunity as still very much a journeyman tester to learn how to
strategize testing for not just one team, but dozens of teams. Instead of having
just a few team mates who were either testers or developers who had some
interest in test to bounce ideas of off, I had dozens of people with a wide
range of testing background to get feedback and idea from. It was an extremely
supportive environment (for the most part). We did bicker about what the "right"
way to do test automation was, the value of test plans and what needed to be in
them, and how code/developer-centric our automated tests should be, but I think
that was a necessary part of the growth process, at least for the first 4 or 5
years. However, after a time, the bike-shedding started to take its toll.
Afterall, if we had created much of our processes and test automation design
libraries and patterns from thin air, why couldn't newer team members do the
same? Over time, the efficiencies that we had tried to build slowed as internal
discussions began to overtake work completed. Our internal soul searching was
also less meaningful to the development organizations we supported, who simply
wanted their applications tested and "signoff" done. Because we were our own
silo, they could not directly impact our processes, just like we could not
directly influence theirs. While there certainly were some teams where
development and test co-existed in a peaceful and symbotic manner, more teams
questioned why our QE organization wasn't a part of the development organization
and why individual testers didn't report directly into their teams instead of
through a dotted line. More challenging than that was development leaders and
devs who questioned the technical ability and knowledge of the QE organization.
In some cases this came out as a philisophical question. In others, mine
specifically, it often came out at passive agressive comments in meetings or
emails. Beyond the technical challenges of automation, the domain the teams
I worked with was additionally complex, which required finding testers who
were willing to wrap their heads around those challenging topics. While we did
have sprints, the dev and test teams still very much operated in silos and in
a "scummerfall" manner. There were two test environments, of which one was
allotted to our teams to use. We did have automated deployments, but we did
not have automated validation of those deployments. Instead, our functional
tests were the first to pick up on failed deployments to servers,
network issues, and a plethora of other common problems. Given that our testing
was of the APIs, these issues appeared to be bugs, which led to a larger than
normal set of bugs that were created but closed as "environmental". This also
meant that we were responsible for having some team members online for each
production release to run our functional tests and triage failures before the
maintenance could be marked as complete. Patience for test failures at 2 am when
everyone really wanted to get to bed was very short. Stumbling into these
"environmental" issues and other transient issues which required the re-running
of long test suites built a sense of distrust between the dev/ops teams and QE.
It was often pointed out that our tests seemed flaky, even though the failures
were legitimate issues, though not related to the actual application code.
Distrust on both sides grew into hostility, turning an already challenging work
environment into one that required endless due dilligence, documentation, and
reports necessary to prove points that were being ignored or to use as evidence
of our work incase we were thrown under the bus. Unfortunately, at that point
there was no amount of talking, test improvements, or reporting to repair the
dev/test relationship. My leaders and the development leaders both reported up
different silos, so there was no easy way to de-escalate the tensions and
concerns. Through all this, I believed that I could still "fix" things. Better
automated tests. More reporting. More visibility into how things were being
tested and what really happened when tests failed. I thought that somehow, all
alone, I could make things right again. As I'm sure you can guess, I couldn't.
When I returned from leave after getting married, my boss told me that it was
time to let go, and that he would be re-assigning me to another team. My
mental response was a mixture of relief, anger, and shame. I didn't have to deal
with trying to move this un-moveable problem anymore, but I had failed in my
mission to make things right. I "lost", they "won". My confidence was broken at
that point, and despite the encouragement of my leaders, it took at least 2
years for me to mostly recover. I still question myself far more than I did
before, which is a habit that I'm working on breaking. The painful lesson I
learned from this story is that there are some workspace problems that either
can't or won't be fixed. I could not explain, influence, or engineer my way of
the perceptions and biases that my development team had. I would like to think
that most reasonable people would have quit before hitting the red line like I
did. Knowing when you're facing a challenge that is negatively impacting your
career and is something that is likely not to be resolved is a lesson that I
wish I could have learned in a less painful way, but now it's certainly a lesson
I won't forget.

## What should I want from my leader

- Genuinely interested in me and my career growth
- Sets goals that stretch your current knowledge and comfort
- Will give you honest but constructive feedback
- Listens, understands, and acts on your concerns when possible
- Acts in your best interest over theirs
- Leaves you the room and grace to fail when necessary
- Can articulate your accomplishments in clear and meanful ways to their peers
  and leadership

## Benefits of reporting to a test leader

Their focus is solely on testing. They may have a greater pool of knowledge
about testing strategies, test automation, and metrics that are useful to
produce.

You probably have a lot of other testers as a team mates. This not only gives
you a larger pool of people to ask questions to, but creates a "safe" zone to
talk about testing topics and build a culture where testing and newer testing
techniques are embraced.

Your leader may understand your accomplishments and challenges you've overcome
more clearly and may be able to be a stronger advocate for you. Again, it
partially depends on organizational biases about testing. If testers are
embraced as "full-share"/equal team members in discussions, then this point is
less important. However, if testers are looked down on as "less than", your
leader might be your primary source of positive information about your
contributions to senior leadership. However, this also relies on your leader's
ability to influence and explain the impact of your work as well. There is a
large difference between a leader stating "Well X is the greatest tester I've
worked with!" and "Here's some metrics I pulled since X join the team, and we've
and Y percent less bugs discovered in production since he joined the team". One
is a feeling, the other is documented improvement.

## Downsides of reporting to a test leader

You have a different leader than other members of your team. Issues between two
ICs on the project now require including their managers. If the issue can't be
resolved, it may require meetings to sort things out and come to an agreement.
However, if the whole team reports to a single leader, when necessary the leader
can make a decision one way or another and keep the team productive.

Your leader's vision of testing may not align with your own. Maybe you're an
exploritory tester wanting to find all the corner cases, but your leader is
all about test automation. You may have hoped that having a leader with a
simular background would accelerate the growth path you wanted, but their
priorities may not align with yours. Given that your leader is the decision
maker for your thought area, unless you can convince them to allow you to grow
in the way you intended, you have no one else to appeal to without having an
outside leader come in and advocate on your behalf, which could be seen as
breaking the chain of command and not taken well.

## Upsides of reporting to a dev manager

If your growth path is to eventually be a developer, you can work directly with
your manager to make that happen. They also have direct visibility into your
work, so proving your abilities should be less challenging.

If your area of interest in testing is test automation, you likely have a huge
advocate on your side. Creating test automation is a development activity, and
showing that you can align with the team's development style and requirements
even as a tester shows that you take test automation seriously.

If you report to the same dev manager as everyone on the team, then the team is
aligned on the same goal. This generally means less infighting about priorities,
more visibility into testing activities, and more team acknowledgement of your
wins in your role. Having your team act as your advocates as well as your
manager makes your accomplishes that much more visible.

## Downsides of reporting to a dev manager

If your leader has a poor view of testing, they may do little to advocate for
you. If devs are seen as a higher rank than testers, your leader may see your
only opportunity for advancement as switching to a developer at some point.

If you're very good at what you do and want some mobility either in test or dev,
your leader may encourage you to stay in your current role because of your
value. This often isn't malicious, but a statement of the value they see you
bringing to the team. It can be uncomfortable to work against those statements
of value towards what you see as your real career goals. Everyone wants to be
consider valuable, and to give that up to be something else can be a difficult
mental hurdle.
